Hello everyone.
In this lesson we are going to begin applying our newly acquired javascript knowledge or in other words
let's get back to building out our travel Web site to be more specific.
Let's work on the mobile view of our header navigation.
Let's dive right in and get started.
All right.
So several lessons ago we created this top blue bar header.
And if we take a look at smaller screens you will remember that we decided to hide the header navigation
links initially and we will only display them if a user taps on this top right menu icon.
Well I'm currently clicking and tapping on this icon and nothing's happening.
That's because we never set up that functionality.
Well now that we know how to write organized javascript let's go ahead and bring that functionality
to life.
Let's jump over to our text editor.
Let's open our main JavaScript file which lives in the app assets scripts folder and its name is app
J.S..
Now the person class in the adult class and the john and jane objects from our previous lessons we're
just hypothetical examples.
So at this point let's delete all of this.
So delete the john and jane code.
Also we can delete our adult class.
Essentially we can delete this lesson example code below this line comment and everything below it.
Also up at the top we can delete this line where we include the person file.
OK.
And while we're at it let's also delete the person dot J.S. file.
All right.
And if our goal for this lesson is to create this mobile menu functionality why don't we go ahead and
stay organized by creating a new module file dedicated to the mobile menu.
So within these scripts modules folder let's create a new file let's name this new file mobile menu
dot J.S. let's begin by creating a class and let's name it mobile menu.
And we know that we are going to want to import this file from within our main app J.S. file.
So within this file let's be sure to export this class.
So let's say export default and then the name of the class mobile menu.
All right.
Now within this class let's add a constructor function constructor.
This function will be ran immediately when a new object is created with this class.
So for now let's just try a test to make sure that everything's working correctly.
Let's alert a message that says testing from Mobile menu.
All right let's go ahead and save this file and then jump back to our main app J.S. file and we want
to go ahead and import in the mobile menu module.
So let's say import mobile menu.
And this is really just a variable name that we are creating.
So this could be anything we could call this magical variable.
But just to stay organized why don't we have it match the actual name of the class.
So import mobile menu from and then we just provide a path to the module file.
So go into the modules folder and grab mobile menu.
Now simply importing a module file like this in and of itself won't do anything.
We also need to create a new object that uses this class as a blueprint.
So on a new line let's say new mobile menu.
Now technically this code will work.
This will create a new object that uses this class.
But I would say that nine times out of ten when you create a new object you probably want to save it
to a variable so that you can access or reference it later on.
So at the beginning of this line let's say let and we can come up with any name we like.
How about we name this variable mobile menu.
But we begin with a lowercase m.
So this code should look familiar.
In our previous examples this is very similar to saying that the John object was a new instance of the
Person class.
Now if we save this file over in the browser we see that test alert message pop up
so at this point we are ready to jump back into the mobile menu module file and begin building the actual
functionality.
So let's delete this test alert message and let's think about what our first steps should be.
So before we worry about actually revealing or expanding the navigation links let's first focus on responding
at all to the event of this top right icon being clicked or tapped.
So let's jump over to our text editor and within the constructor function let's write a bit of code
that logs out a bit of dummy text to the console whenever this top right icon is clicked or tapped.
And I'm actually going to begin by showing you what we should not do.
I'm going to code this the way that I used to write JavaScript in the past.
This code will technically work and it might look familiar to you.
But I want to take the time to point out all of the problems with this style of coding.
I call this spaghetti code.
So within our constructor let's begin by selecting that element that gets clicked on so document dot
query selector quotes and then a dot to select a class.
And it had a class of site header underscore underscore menu icon.
Okay.
So that selects the element that gets clicked on.
Then at the end of that we can say dot and add an event listener add event listener within these parentheses
quotes the event that we're listening for is a click or tap event still within the parentheses.
But after those quotes it's a comma and then include a function.
So the word function parentheses curly brackets within those curly brackets lets dropdown and remember
we just wanted to log a test message to the consoles or console log the top right.
Icon was clicked.
Let's go ahead and save this.
And if we jump over to the browser and I open my console we see that as soon as I click this top right
icon our dummy text is logged out to the console.
Which means our messy spaghetti code is working.
So if this code works what's my problem with it.
Why do I think we should avoid it.
Well I call this spaghetti code because like a plate of noodles everything is sort of tangled and intertwined
together.
Another way of thinking about this is that in your home you don't just throw all of your spoons and
forks and knives into one big messy jar.
But that's exactly what this code is doing.
It's all smushed together even though it's using three different tools to perform three different actions.
So a we are selecting an element from the DOM B we are event handling and c we are defining our functionality.
Now this chunk of code may seem manageable in this simple example but as we begin working on more and
more complex features this coding style quickly becomes a dirty filthy mess.
So let's delete this and instead I want to show you a way that we can structure our code so that our
forks spoons and knives each fit into their own little organized compartments.
So within our constructor function the only thing that I'm going to include is a property or shortcut
that stores our Dom selection for the menu icon element.
So let's say this dot menu icon equals.
And then to select that Dom element we just say document dot query selector within these parentheses
it's quotes a dot for a class and it had a class of site header underscore underscore menu icon.
All right.
Now below this constructor function let's create a new method named events.
And within this method let's list any and all events that we want to watch for.
So for example we know that we want to be on the lookout for this menu icon element being clicked.
So within this events method let's say this dot menu icon and then a dot and then we want to add an
event listener to it.
So add event listener within these parentheses the type of event we want to listen for is a click then
read after the quotes a comma and then this is where we include a function or what we want to happen
in response to that click.
Only this time we are not going to spell out and define our functionality of what we want to actually
happen within these parentheses instead below.
This events method let's create a brand new method named toggle the menu and for the time being let's
just have this method log out a bit of dummy text to the console array the icon was clicked and then
within our event handler what do we want to do in the icon is clicked we want to respond by calling
or running the toggle the menu method.
So after this comma here we could just list a reference directly to this method.
However when add event listener runs whatever function we list here it's going to modify the value of
this keyword.
Now you and I are used to the this keyword pointing towards the current object that this blueprint is
creating.
However add event listener wants to modify the this keyword to point towards the DOM element that was
just clicked on.
So to get around this instead of just listing a simple reference directly to our method here what we're
going to do is provide an arrow function here.
So right after the comma typed this in with me an empty set of parentheses.
And then after that new set of parentheses include an equal sign and a greater than symbol and then
a space and then say this dot toggle the menu.
And finally an extra set of parentheses to actually call that method.
So what we just created here is an arrow function.
One of the nice things about an arrow function is that it does not manipulate the value of this keyword.
In other words out event listener is not receiving a direct reference to our method.
Instead we're passing out event listener arrow function that it's going to call and then it's our arrow
function that is actually going to execute toggle the menu and since an arrow function does not manipulate
this keyword.
When this code runs the this keyword will still be pointing towards our overall object.
If that doesn't make perfect sense or even if that doesn't make any sense at all that's OK.
Once we select a few more dom elements I think things will become clear before we get too far ahead
of ourselves.
And actually before we save this file I do want to point out that the web browser is not going to be
on the lookout for a special method named events.
We could have named this anything.
The reason I bring this up is because if we want to begin listening for this click event as soon as
the page loads we need to make sure that our events method is called at some point.
So do this with me in our constructor let's just be sure to call this dot events.
All right.
With this in place let's go ahead and save this file and see if we can find this test message in the
browser's console back in the browser with a small screen to simulate a smartphone.
If you go ahead and click on the top right menu icon here cool in my console we see Hurray.
The icon was clicked but logging a message to the console is not what we truly want to do.
Instead now that we know this is working let's set things up so that when you click on this icon we
add a new CSX class to the element that is currently hidden right the element with the navigation links
and that new CSX class will make that div visible again.
Let me show you what I mean.
So back in our text editor let's begin in our constructor by adding another property that selects that
div element right the element that contains that content that's hidden for small screens.
So on a new line in the constructor we can say this dot menu content should equal document dot query
selected quotes and it had a class of site header underscore underscore menu content.
OK.
Now down in our toggle the menu method we don't actually want to log a message to the console get rid
of that.
Instead we want to add a class to this element that makes it visible.
So in toggle the menu we can just say this dot menu content dot class list dot toggle within these parentheses.
Let's provide a pair of quotes and the toggle method that belongs to class list will add a new CSF class
to an element if it doesn't already have it.
And if the element does already have whatever class you list here it will remove the class.
Hence the name toggle.
So within these quotes let's toggle a CSF class of site header underscore underscore menu content and
then for a bear modifier class let's say Dash Dash is Dash visible.
Now before we hit save and test this out I do want to talk for just a moment about the this keyword.
If we did not provide an arrow function here and instead listed a direct reference to the toggle the
menu method then add event listener would have ran this code within a context where this would be pointing
towards the element that got clicked on.
However because we provided an arrow function so that this keyword doesn't change.
Well when this line of code runs this is still pointing towards our overall object which lets us easily
access our menu content property.
So let's save this and check things out in the browser.
And before I click on this top right icon let's actually right click on it and choose inspect this will
switch your dev tools from the console view to the elements view and right below the selected element
we see our menu content Dev.
And this is the element that we wanted to add a class to.
So with this in view let's go ahead and test things out and click the icon perfect.
So we see that it added an extra modifier class that ends in is visible.
If you don't see this class added in you're sure that you typed out the code correctly in this lesson.
You might just need to manually refresh your web browser since web pack is loading our javascript into
the browser on the fly without a page refresh.
That means all of our old or outdated event listeners will still be attached to Dom elements and in
this particular case if you've saved the file an even number of times well you might have two event
listeners that are trying to both add and remove a class at the same time.
So if things are not working as you would expect just refresh the browser and then try tapping on the
top right icon once again.
And if I click the top right icon again that extra class gets removed.
So now revealing and hiding the navigation links for small screens is as simple as adjusting our CSF
to target that is visible modifier class.
So back in our text editor let's open up our header CSX file so it lives in app assets styles modules
and its name is site header.
Let's go ahead and scroll down to the very bottom of this file.
Here is the rule that's targeting our menu content element.
So currently the baseline style is to be hidden for small screens and then we are telling medium sized
screens to display it once again.
So within this rule let's add a modifier class.
Let's use the ampersand symbol so we don't have to type this out again and then we can simply say Dash
Dash is visible and to make it visible.
Let's just set it to display block.
Let's go ahead and save this file and check things out in the browser.
And if we click this top right icon we see our navigation elements are visible and we can tap it again
to hide them.
And at this point our functionality is in place.
Now it's just a matter of using CSF to make things look nice and that is exactly what we will be doing
in our next lesson.
Right now I will overlay some footage of the styling that I have in mind and in our next lesson we will
work together to bring this to life.
It should be a lot of fun.
Let's keep rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.